# A Family's Transition from Rural Life to Modernity

In the mid-1960s, Birendra Varma and Shivendra Varma were first cousins who were studying for their PhD degrees in England, Birendra at the Imperial College in London and Shivendra at Manchester Institute of Technology. It is hard to believe that just two generations earlier their grandfather was a barely literate villager from rural Bihar. Birendra was my Father, and this is the story of his family from the early 1800s onwards, and how they were able to make this transition. In some sense this is also a story of Modern India, and the changes that were brought about as the country modernised and the people adjusted to a new reality with a new educations system and new professions that were becoming available. 

I learnt most of this family history from an Autobiography that was written by Grand Uncle Phuldeo Sahay Varma (who was my Grandfather's younger brother and Shivendra's father). He lived from 1889 to 1991, and having grown up during the waning years of the 19th century he had childhood memories of how things were while the family was still living in the village, and during the course of his long life he was a witness to the transformation to urban life. He was a very accomplished man himself, a Chemist by profession, and spent most of his life teaching at the Banaras Hindu University. He worked on his Autobiography in the 1960s after he had retired from teaching. A few tens of copies were published that were distributed among the family members. My father had  a copy, which has ended up on my bookshelf.

Our ancestors are from the eastern part of the Gangetic Plain, near the confluence of the Ganga and Saryu Rivers. This area has been of enormous importance in Indian history, and served as the center of the Maurya Empire in the 3 Century BCE, as well as the Gupta Empire a few centuries later. It continued to be an important and prosperous part of India during the last 1000 years under Muslim rule, and when the British came to India, Bengal and this part of Bihar were the first areas that they conquered – this happened during the latter half of the 18th century. Unfortunately, the British also pursued policies that destroyed the local economy including the traditional industry that existed at that time, since they wanted to sell the goods coming from their own mechanized factories in England. As a result of this and their extractive tax policies, the economy of this area sank during the 1800s and hasn’t really recovered even now. 
During the early 1800s, when our family first appears in the record, farming was the only available profession, and you will see that most family members were engaged in it. However by the end of the century, college education became more widely available and other professions opened up. You will see that our family made the jump from farming to city based professions fairly readily around that time, which makes me think that earlier generations were engaged in cognitive professions rather than farming.

We belong to the Kayastha caste, who first occurs in historical records about 1000 years ago. Kayasthas were known as scribes initially and later gained fame (and some notoriety) as administrators and bureaucrats under Muslim rulers. In recent times the community has made considerable contributions to Modern India in a variety of different fields (check out the Wikipedia page on Kayasthas for a good description).

*Our ancestors have lived in this village since the 1700s. The village is on the northern banks on the Saryu River, which forms the border between the states of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. The river has moved away from the village now, but at the time when Phuldeo was growing up there in the 1890s, the river ran a few hundred feet from his home. He recalls taking a bath in the river almost daily.*

*During the late 1700s there were 3 Kayastha families in Kausar, our family lived in the eastern part of the village, while the other 2 families lived in the western part. Our family moved to Kausar from village of Kirtupur in Balia District in Uttar Pradesh. Kirtupur is located 5-6 miles to the south of Kausar. It is not known when this happened, most likely sometime in the 1700s. According to stories Phuldeo heard: Our family was closely associated with a Kshatriya family. Two brothers from this Kshatriya family had a bitter feud, which led to several lives being lost. In order to avoid this violence, some members of the Kshatriya family migrated to Kausar, and our family followed them. As a result, neither of the families owned any ancestral property in Kausar when they started living there. Subsequently Phuldeo’s grandfather Ramroop, whom we shall meet later, was able to acquire farming land in Kausar and in some of the surrounding villages.*

*Phuldeo’s Great Grandfather’s name was Sudarshan Das.  Sudarshan had three sons and two daughters:  Among the sons, Phuldeo’s Grandfather was the oldest, his name was Ramroop Lal  (1825 - 1910). The middle son was Thakur Lal and the youngest was Govind Lal (1829 - 1914). Phuldeo does not know when Sudarshan passed away (probably happened around 1840) or the cause of death. When Sudarshan passed away, his oldest son Ramroop was still very young, but had to assume responsibility for the family since there was no older male member who could do so.*

*At the time of Sudarshan’s death, his daughters were already married, and they lived in a nearby village. Ramroop and Thakur went to stay with their sisters after he was gone, and that is where they completed their schooling. Govind stayed on in Kausar at a neighbor’s home, and was not able to go to school.*

*Ramroop studied Hindi and Kaithi at school, but didn’t go to college (Kaithi is the script used for the ancestral language Bhojpuri which is spoken in Western Bihar and Eastern Uttar Pradesh).  Thakur on the other studied further and became a very good scholar of Farsi and Urdu.  However he passed away shortly after his wedding, as a result of which the study of Farsi and Urdu was banned in our family.  The youngest brother Govind, never married. He had a robust physique and became very skilled in farming activities. The farmers in the village frequently consulted him often on farming related issues. With his help, the output of our family farms increased substantially and they produced enough grains and produce for the family to live comfortably. Govind passed away at the age of 85 in 1914, the cause of death was some stomach ailment, Phuldeo does not know the details.*

During the time (1840s and 1850s) that the brothers were of school and college going age, colleges and universities based on the Western model did not yet exist in India, for example the first colleges in Bombay and Calcutta were founded in 1857. For most people education was limited to primary schooling which took care of basic literacy. Some people went on for pre-colonial advanced education, in which learning Farsi was probably an important part. Farsi (or Persian) was the language used in the court of the Mughals, and if one aspired to a position in their administration, learning Farsi was required.

*Ramroop was a very impressive personality and dominated the social life in Kausar and the surrounding villages. He was six feet tall, fair in complexion, and a handsome man. He was very fond of food, especially anchars (pickles) of various types, and loved to have people over for meals. Indeed he spent so much in entertaining others, that at the time of his death he left a debt that had to be paid off by the family. Ramroop was very influential in the village, indeed he served informally as the local ruler. All disputes were referred to him and he served as a judge in these cases. This was before the formal Court system was established in that part of Bihar, which happened during the last years of his life.*

*During the last ten years of his life, Ramroop was homebound due to ill health. He passed away at age 85 in 1910 on Karthik Purnima day (co-incidentally this falls exactly hundred years before the death anniversary of his great grandson and my father Birendra). The cause of death was cardiac arrest.*

*Ramroop had three sons and two daughters. The sons were, from oldest to youngest: Mahabir Lal, Shiv Sahay Lal (Phuldeo’s father) and Ramanand Lal.*

*Mahabir Lal (1849-1924) was not very educated; he mostly stayed home and looked after the affairs of the farm.  He married and had children, but all of them passed away in their infancy. He suffered from hypertension and passed away at age 75 after a stroke. Ramanand Lal  (1880-1965) did not do very well in life. He had been told by astrologers that he will die at age 21, as a result nobody put any pressure on him and he lived with few constraints on his behavior.  As a result he did not pursue regular studies, but he did study the Gita and Ramayan, and later became a sadhu (ascetic) and lived at the local ashram in Kausar.  He never married and died at age 85 in 1965.*

*Shiv Sahay Lal (my great grandfather, 1855-1930, (see Photo 1) had five sons and three sisters. The sons were, from oldest to youngest (see Photo 2): Gopalji, Baldev Sahay, IndraDeo Narayan (my grandfather), VishnuDeo Narayan and Phuldeo Sahay Varma (the writer of the autobiography from which this material is taken). The three sisters all died of the plague while they were still young. Shiv Sahay’s wife (and my great grandmother) also died of the plague in 1900, at about 40 years in age. Plague struck the Kausar area twice, in 1900 and then again in 1901.*

*Shiv Sahay himself  only obtained the basic school education, but he was the first person in the family to learn English. He was very keen that his sons get college education, and in order to facilitate this, he left Kausar and lived in the city of Gaya, where he worked in the District Collector’s office. All the brothers lived with him in Gaya and completed their high school education there. Shiv Sahay retired and returned back to Kausar at age 55 in 1910, and lived there for the rest of his life.  He passed away in Varanasi at age 75 in 1930, after a cardiac arrest. Phuldeo has a fascinating anecdote about how this happened: Shiv Sahay had the premonition that his last days had come, he then sent a communication to his four surviving sons to come to Varanasi at once. When they got there they noticed that he looked perfectly healthy, and even the doctors could not find anything wrong with him. The next day after they got there, he went for his afternoon nap after lunch, and never got back up.*

In retrospect, Shiv Sahay was responsible for the movement of our family from rural farming life to professional occupations in the city. Even though he himself was not very well educated, he made sure that his sons all went to college, and ultimately two of them did very well professionally and settled down in in cities,  rather than returning to Kausar and village life, as everyone else had done before them: My Grandfather IndraDeo in Chapra as an attorney, and Phuldeo in Varanasi as a professor and scientist.

*The oldest brother Gopalji (1876-1940), was short in stature, about 5’3” in Phuldeo’s estimation. After finishing high school in Gaya, he started working as a “Kirani” in the District Collector’s office. The additional income that he bought in helped to shore up the family finances, and enabled his younger brothers to go to college. He continued working till age 55, and then retired and returned back to Kausar around 1931 and busied himself in farm work. Unfortunately he started suffering from hypertension soon after, and there were signs of stroke in his facial features.  The medications that were available at that time were not able to effectively treat him, and he passed away in 1940. The next brother Baldev Sahay (1878-1946) settled down in the town of Siwan  after finishing his High School and worked as a “Mokhtar” in the local court (In an Indian court of that time, a Mokhtar’s job was to represent plaintiffs or defendants in the court, if they could not attend themselves). He had tried to get an advanced post high school degree so that he could practice Law, but was un-successful in this. He passed away in 1946, Phuldeo did not go into the cause of his death.*

*The next brother (and my grandfather) IndraDeo (1884-1959), distinguished himself in academic work. He was a very diligent student: He was placed among the top students in Bihar in High School finals exam, and after that he moved to Patna, finished his BA degree and then studied Law. He was placed 2nd in Calcutta University Law Exam around 1910, which was very big deal and something that was still spoken of in the family when I was growing up in Chapra in the 1960s. He started a law practice in Chapra, and within a few years established himself as one of the best attorney’s there. The success of his law practice led made him a rich man and he built a beautiful mansion in Chapra sometime during the 1920s, which still stands (see Photo 4), though no longer with the family. He was also quite religious, was especially interested in the Theosophical Society and regularly attended its meetings. He paid a lot of attention to keeping in good health and rarely missed his morning walk. Hence it came as a surprise to Phuldeo, when IndraDeo’s health started deteriorating rapidly, after 1950 or so, after he came down with a bad case of Kaidast (probably diarrhoea). His blood pressure shot up, and never came down after that.  Towards the end of his life he also came down with kidney disease, possibly due to an enlarged prostrate, for which there was no cure at that time. He passed away in Patna in January 1959.*

I never met him since I was born in 1963, four years after he passed away. But I grew up in the house that he built in Chapra, and lived there until I was six. His wife (and my Grandmother) Girija, was like a second mother, and she ran the household after his passing, little changed from the time he lived there. It was quite a fascinating place, and as I realized later, the way of life was closer to way people lived in earlier times, perhaps 100 years ago, than to the modern times. There were some similarities to life depicted in period English dramas that are so popular these days, with its hierarchies of servants and social stratification. Indeed I had my own servant, I still remember his name, Eshwar. The head servant’s name was Lachan, and he had been with the family since the 1930s. Due to the family’s prominence in the local community, Lachan also served as a leader of  servant folks who lived in that area, and I remember every weekend he would organize raucous sessions in the front porch, in which they would all get together and sing bhajans.
The home had a large central courtyard or angan, with a hand driven water pump in the middle, all the other rooms were arranged around it. There was also a roof one could climb up to, with had the foundations of additional rooms which had been abandoned before they could be completed. I was told that the home did have a second storey once, but it came down in the Great Earthquake of 1934.
My family moved away to Bombay in 1969, and then 6 years later in 1975, my Grandmother passed away. The home was never fully occupied after that, and slowly deteriorated. My last visit to Chapra was in 1982. A few years ago it was sold off, and no longer belongs to our family. The photograph (Photo 4) does not do justice to the home, since it was taken recently after several decades of neglect.

After his first wife passed away, IndraDeo married my Grandmother Girija, and they had two sons and two daughters (see Photo 3). The oldest daughter Sushila, known as Bachi within the family, was an early career minded woman, having served as the Principal of a girl’s school in Patna for several decades. The second daughter Urmila, known as Lali within the family, was married to my Fufa who worked in the Railways, and they had four children, two of whom were near my age. They lived in Bombay as well, so we used to meet them quite often when I was growing up. My father Birendra and his brother Rajendra were fraternal twins, they did their schooling in Chapra, and then went to Patna for their Bachelors. 

Bachi Bua’s home in Pataliputra Colony was our official HQ whenever we visited Patna from Bombay during vacation, and I have many fond memories of the place. The home had several guava trees around the property, and my earliest memories were climbing these trees to get at the delicious fruit. Later as  I grew older I discovered their well stocked library, and encountered several favorite fictional works for the first time there; the list includes Tintin, Perry Mason and PG Wodehouse among others. They were also very fond of gardening, and I am trying my best to re-create their beautiful hedges of rose bushes in our home in San Jose.

*IndraDeo’s younger brother VishnuDeo Narayan passed away at a young age after suffering from splenitis. Phuldeo speculated that it was caused due to a Kala Azhar infection that was not properly treated, since its medication was not available at that time.*

*This brings us to the youngest brother and the author of the autobiography which serves as the source material for this family history – Phuldeo Sahay Varma (1889-1981). Phuldeo was born in Kausar in 1889 and spent the first 12 years of his life there. He then joined his brothers and father in Gaya, where he obtained his primary and secondary school education.  He subsequently did an MSc and also spent 2 years doing research at the Indian Institute of Science in Bangalore. He was the first in the family to study science, a path that was then followed by his sons Satyendra and Shivendra, and also his nephew Birendra.  He spent most of his career at the Benares Hindu University, where he was a Professor of Chemistry, and later also served as the Chancellor.*

I used to meet Phuldeo Dada quite often since he lived with his son Shivendra (Munnu) Chacha who was in New Bombay at the time when we were in Anushakti Nagar, during the 1970s. Munnu Chacha worked for a British multi-national company which later transferred him to Kanpur, and by co-incidence our family followed them to Kanpur after a year or so. By this time I was older, and I got to know Phuldeo Dada better, and I was there in Kanpur at the time he passed away in 1981. A dear memory I have of Phuldeo Dada happened during the time towards the end of 1980, when he was very ill and already on his deathbed. The rest of my family had gone off to Patna to attend a wedding, I was alone at home, having stayed back because of school. Unfortunately I came down with high fever while they were away, and then decided to go to Munnu Chacha’s house. That night, as a I was tossing and turning with fever, I suddenly noticed Phuldeo Dada walk into my room, he was strapped with drips that were attached to a mobile fixture that he was dragging behind him. He obviously shouldn’t have been walking around, and he could hardly talk, but he wanted know how I was doing.

